ROX-33506: add docs for new migration process (#21126)
stackrox/stackrox: migrator/README.md

# StackRox Database Migrations

## IMPORTANT: Idempotency and Backwards compatibility

All migrations must be backwards compatible to ensure safe rollback.
Migrations must be idempotent because they re-execute when rolling forward after a rollback.
Migrations are forward only, there are no reverse migrations.

**All migrations must be backwards compatible**. This means:
- No destructive schema changes (dropping columns, renaming columns)
- Data transformations must work with both old and new application code

> - New columns should use the zero value or a new field name to avoid conflicts

Author: Done

| `network_flows_v2` | RHIT, IBM, Dogfood, AppSRE, RHIT2 |
| `process_indicators` | RHIT, IBM, AppSRE, RHIT2 |

## How the systems interact

```
Central upgrade sequence:

  +----------------------------------------------------------+
  |                   STARTUP PHASE                          |
  |                                                          |
  |  1. Migrator acquires advisory lock                      |
  |  2. Run startup migrations sequentially                  |
  |  3. GORM AutoMigrate applies all registered schemas      |
  |     (includes unique index creation)                     |
  |  4. Release advisory lock                                |
  |                                                          |
  |  New Central is NOT serving traffic during this phase.   |
  |  With RollingUpdate, old Central continues serving.      |
  +----------------------------+-----------------------------+
                               |
                               v
  +----------------------------------------------------------+
  |              CENTRAL STARTS SERVING                      |
  |                                                          |

>   |  6. Datastores initialize                                |

Reviewer: I notice the numbering in this diagram jumps from 4 to 6 - was 5 intentionally skipped or is that a typo?

Author: Thanks, I noticed that's an good old LLM issue, sometimes when you ask it to remove items it does not update numbered lists. Should have better validated myself. Fixed now.

                               |
                               v
  +----------------------------------------------------------+
  |         BACKGROUND PHASE (concurrent)                    |
  |                                                          |
  |  Background Migrations:                                  |
  |  9. Rollout checker waits for all old pods to terminate  |
  | 10. Acquire background migration advisory lock           |
  | 11. Run background migrations sequentially               |
  | 12. Each migration checkpoints progress on completion    |
  | 13. Reconcile indexes (CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY         |
  |     for all non-unique index fields)                     |
  |                                                          |
  |  Central IS serving traffic during this phase            |
  +----------------------------------------------------------+
```

The rollout checker (step 9) ensures that no old-version Central pods are still running
before background migrations begin. This prevents conflicts between old code writing data
in the pre-migration format while the migration is transforming it.

### Testing backwards compatibility

> The `gke-upgrade-tests` start with a 4.1.3 deployment and upgrade to the current

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `gke-upgrade-tests` start with a 4.6.2 deployment and upgrade to the current
```

Author: Fixed.

release, executing all migrations and verifying rollback succeeds.

Beyond that, for any schema and/or data changes, engineers should:

1. Deploy the previous version
2. Upgrade to the current version
3. Exercise the change (populate any necessary data)
4. Rollback to the previous version
5. Verify Central is up and functioning
6. Roll forward to the current version
7. Verify migrations executed and functionality works

## Feature flags and migrations

**Do not use feature flags in migration code.**

Both startup and background migrations must produce the same result regardless of feature
flag state. If a feature needs a new field, the migration must populate it unconditionally.
The feature flag controls whether the application *uses* the field, not whether it *exists*.

If a feature cannot work without a migration, the data should be migrated prior to any work
on the feature. If a feature can work without migration at lesser cost, workaround code can
be written to work on the existing schema. Once the feature is GA, a migration can be written
and the workaround code replaced.

## Index Management

> All indexes are managed through proto tags and the code generator. Add `sql:"index"` to

Reviewer 2: Not entirely true.  Network flows schema is not generated it is created by hand since GORM does not support partitions.  So that one is bespoke and the indexes are done in the schema file itself.

Author: This was new to me. I'll get more context about NetworkFlows and adjust the doc accordingly.

Author: I added a section below to call out the NetworkFlows special case.

string key = 2;              // @gotags: sql:"index=name:groups_unique;type:btree;category:unique"
string value = 3;            // @gotags: sql:"index=name:groups_unique;type:btree;category:unique"
```

## Writing migrations

- **Startup migration**: See [STARTUP_MIGRATIONS.md](STARTUP_MIGRATIONS.md) for the full
  guide including bootstrapping, DDL patterns, and testing.
- **Background migration**: See [BACKGROUND_MIGRATIONS.md](../central/backgroundmigrations/BACKGROUND_MIGRATIONS.md)
  for the full guide including concurrency handling, batching patterns, and testing.

## Migrator limitations

The migrator upgrades data from a previous datamodel to the current one. Each migration may
apply a different schema change, so the current datastore or schema code cannot be used.

Each migration is responsible for accessing the databases it needs and converting the data.
A migration must **never** import schemas from `pkg/postgres/schema` -- those evolve with the
latest release. Instead, freeze schemas inside the migration package. This is primarily
relevant for background migrations that deserialize data; startup migrations that only
run DDL typically don't need frozen schemas.

> ## History

Reviewer 2: Do we really need to keep this section?  I'm inclined to just remove that old and stale stuff.

Author: Done.
